The Bible is a modern-day treasure. It reveals the satisfying truth about God,
life, and our hope for the future. What's more, it contains another
priceless treasure. God's personal name Jehovah. How Jehovah preserved his name
in the Holy Scriptures against all attempts to remove it is a fascinating story.
And it's told here in the Bible Museum at World Headquarters in Warwick. Let's take the tour.
At the museum's entry, the divine name is shown in various languages a total of 7,216 times.
That's how many times it appears in the new world translation of the Holy Scriptures.
Jehovah always made his name known even to the very first humans. When Cane was born,
Eve declared, I have produced a male child with the help of Jehovah.
After that time, people knew and used God's name. The oldest example of the divine name in
Hebrew letters is on the Moabite Stone from the 9th century BCE. Moabite King Misha
boasted against Israel. I took from it the vessels of Jehovah and offered them before Kymash.
There's also evidence that in ancient times God's name was used in everyday life.
This silver scroll from the 7th century BCE is the earliest known inscription of a Bible text
containing God's name. It reads,
Major Jehovah bless you and keep you. Major Jehovah make his face shine on you.
Most important, God's name was in ancient copies of the Bible text.
The Fouad Papyrus from the 1st century BCE is a fragment of the Greek Septuagint,
the first known translation of the Hebrew Scriptures into Greek. Here's Deuteronomy chapter 32,
verse 3, for I will declare the name of Jehovah. Although the text is in Greek,
the divine name is written in Hebrew. Greek speaking Jews in Jesus' day used the Septuagint.
So when Jesus read and taught from the Scriptures, people heard him use the divine name.
Sadly, though, by the 3rd century CE, God's name was removed from the Septuagint and replaced
with the title Lord. As an example, the Vatican Codex from the 4th century CE
includes the text of the Greek Septuagint, but omits God's name. Deuteronomy chapter 32, verse 3,
here reads,
For I will declare the name of the Lord. But Jehovah wouldn't allow his name to be lost.
It was never removed from Hebrew copies of the Bible.
The Aleppo Codex was copied by Jewish scribes around the year 930 CE.
The same verse, Deuteronomy chapter 32, verse 3, says in Hebrew,
For I will declare the name of Jehovah.
Still, for centuries, most people didn't have a Bible in their own language,
nor one that contained God's name.
The Latin Volgate translated around 405 CE omitted the divine name.
It became the official translation of the Catholic Church for over 1,000 years.
But a new technology triggered events that would soon make the Bible widely available
and infresh translations that return God's name to its rightful place.
About 1453, Johannes Gutenberg produced an important edition of the Latin Volgate.
It was the first Bible printed using movable type.
This is an original page from a Gutenberg Bible.
While only some 180 Bibles were made, his invention sparked the printing revolution.
Just 20 years later, Anton Kohlberger was printing up to 1,000 Bibles per run,
making it the first mass-produced Bible.
On display is an original copy of the second edition of Kohlberger's Latin Bible from 1477.
Then, in the early 1500s, Bible scholars took a renewed interest in the original Bible languages.
For the very first time, the original language Hebrew and Greek scriptures were printed together.
This is the Completency in Polyglot, printed between 1514 and 1517.
A polyglot is a book with text in several languages arranged in columns.
In the Completency in Polyglot, the Bible text appears in Latin, Hebrew,
Aramaic, and Greek.
Comparing the Hebrew text with the Latin, scholars could see where God's name had been
replaced in the Latin Volgate with Lord. But would seeing the divine name in the original Hebrew
text lead Bible translators to restore God's name in their translations?
Indeed, some did. In 1551, Sebastian Castelio published his fresh Latin translation of the Bible.
He appears to be the first to use God's name consistently in a Latin translation of the Hebrew
scriptures. Translations into other languages were also using God's name. In 1530,
William Tindale published his English translation of Genesis through Deuteronomy.
It was the first time that the divine name appeared in any English Bible.
The popular Reina Valera Spanish Bible was published in 1602.
It contains the divine name throughout the Hebrew scriptures.
This is a rare original first edition of the English King James Version of the Bible,
published in 1611. It uses the name Jehovah in just four passages.
Still, the King James Version became the most widely printed book in the world.
Some 200 years later, Benjamin Boothworth, a minister and Hebrew scholar,
set out to revise the King James Version. His 1817 translation was the first
English Bible to use the divine name throughout the Hebrew scriptures.
Meanwhile, church missionaries were taking the Bible to new lands. But without the divine name,
people couldn't distinguish the God of the Bible from their own false gods.
So Bible translations and many languages of Asia, Africa, the Pacific Islands,
and the Americas included God's name. The Chinese delegates version from 1854
is an example of a missionary Bible that uses God's name throughout the Hebrew scriptures.
Still, there was one more place where God's name was not yet restored, the Christian Greek scriptures.
This is the Nuremberg Polyglot, published by Elias Hutter in 1599.
It contains the Christian Greek scriptures in 12 languages, including Hebrew.
Here, John's Gospel quotes Psalm 118 verse 26,
Blessed is the one who comes in Jehovah's name. In his Hebrew translation of the gospel,
Hunter preserved the divine name in the quotation from Psalms. He did this in many other places in the
Greek scriptures. Translators had a precedent to use God's name in the Christian Greek scriptures
where the name appeared in verses quoted from the Hebrew scriptures. This is the 1864
6th edition New Testament translation by Hermann Heinfetter. It's likely the first published
English Bible to use God's name in more than 100 places in the Christian Greek scriptures.
The New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures was first published between 1950 and 1960.
Its translators benefited from the scholarly work of those before them who had chosen to preserve
God's name in their Bible translations. Today, the New World Translation is available in
whole or in part in over 170 languages. God's name, Jehovah, belongs in the Holy Scriptures he inspired.
This gallery holds just a small part of the overwhelming evidence to this fact.
The Bible is a precious gift from God, teaching us about his works, his qualities,
and his loving purpose for humankind. He invites each of us to read it, to draw close to him,
and to know him by his most holy name, Jehovah.